So we hear, um, Ms.
Crow Crowell. Is it Ms. Crowell?
We're just, we can't, apparently you are there.
We might need you to push your camera, or at least your
Audio. And
I'm, I'm a learner,
A zoomer as opposed to a boomer, which I am.
I'm trying to, oh, there we go. There we go.
You can be both apparently.
Can you see me yet? Oh, no, not yet. Wait a minute.
No, we had you, we nearly had you.
Okay, There we go. We've got you. Uh, Ms. Crow.
Is that, is that the correct pronunciation?
That's absolutely correct. Thank you. Yes.
Alright, well look, thank you, um, for your patience.
We have you now, um, we read your submission,
you've got the petitions committee here.
I'm Greg O'Connor, the chair.
We'll just do a brief, um, introduction
and I think you know Greg Fleming. Hi
Joanne. Nice to see you.
And Hey Joe, I'm Paula Garcia, new and mp.
Hello. You wanna be Able to see me?
Alright, look, well thanks Joe.
Now we'll get, you've got 10 minutes,
you can take us your submission as having been read.
Um, but if we can leave some time at the end
for questions, it would be useful.
So go ahead.
Absolutely. Well, first of all,
we all agree that New Zealand is a democracy,
and we can all agree that all voters
and non-voters in the nation matter, large groups
and minority groups smoking are small
and ever shrinking group of society in the highest attacks
compared to alcohol and other devices.
If all of the smokers in museum became sick at once,
the impact on our hospitals, the pale in comparison compared
to of all the obesity
and alcohol related illnesses occurred at once,
advising the public to vape
and instead of smoke is coerced,
substitution and not okay.
It completely undermines the health narrative
and objectives of the current policy has to come in for,
to be updated and parameters expanded to become inclusive.
Look, um, I I know, Joe, I'm sorry.
We're just having a little bit of trouble with your sound.
I wonder if you turn the camera off, it might come
through a little clearer as the sound that sometimes works.
All right, here we go. Sitting,
If it doesn't work, we'll go back
and We'll, we can just hear you,
but it's just quite difficult.
Oh, I'm sorry. Okay. You can't see me?
Can you hear me?
Possibly not That not work.
Oh, look, go back to the camera.
We, we, we can just hear you.
We'll just have to listen harder. Carol,
Should I get closer to the screen?
I don't know if I,
That, that seems to be a little bit better.
So carry on.
Sorry, my computer's having a seizure just
because I'm doing something.
Here we go. Alright.
So basically I believe that new data needs to be collected
regarding STAs.
His life has changed a lot since policy was implemented.
Smoking tax has always been unfair. And you know what?
That's okay. I expect it to always be unfair,
but what they can no longer abide is the tax policy being
hypocritical, dictatorial, unrealistic,
and undemocratic.
The fear monering and finger pointing needs to stop.
Something I find ironic is
that the cigarettes are actually affordable in North Korea.
Surely we are better than North Korea and a OT.
If we can't implement a pilots plan for age based exemption,
then the very least we can do is align pricing.
With Australia being the most
expensive country in the world
to buy cigarettes is nothing to be proud of.
In my opinion, it demonstrates to the world
that our government is dictatorial
and freedom of choice is not encouraged.
Current policy is patronizing
and assumed that all smokers are done
and can't make an informed decision about their own body
illicit trade risk.
Yes, that exists. Now, if we pair the pilot
with a targeted enforcement and track
and trace, this will result in narrow pilots
and lower leakages.
This is not just about the unrealistic smoking attacks.
This is about like being treated an adult,
making an informed decision.
And exercising freedom of choice
policy may have been created with righteousness in mind,
but in reality it is patronizing, demoralizing, illogical,
outdated, hypocritical.
And these days quite irrelevant.
I've respectfully asked government to keep the door open
and please let us discuss the way forward in a democratic
and sustainable manner for all parties.
Alright, thank you. So, um, members questions?
Yeah. So, um, Joanne, have you seen the,
the submissions from Ash and from health?
Now you've seen those, have you had a chat?
Yes, I have read and I, um, sent some responses
to those submissions to, um,
Did I've seen my responses
and I'm, I'm not trying to undermine policy or,
or what they're trying to achieve.
I'm on side of that and MOH I'm on their side.
I just want be a little more broader, broader focus
and bring the train for a service.
What, what was your answer
to their concern about the on selling of cigarettes?
Yes, absolutely. Um, the illicit change risk is real
and I don't deny that.
Um, but that risk already exists now.
Um, if we clear the pilot with a targeted enforcement,
then to track and trace this will result in a narrow target
and lowering leakage.
So there's work to do around it.
It's a new area and, um, I like the fact
that New Zealand are pioneered
and I want us to pioneer our way into
clarity with this policy.
Alright, and just building on that question, in Australia,
particularly in Victoria, they've got major problems with
illicit supply of alcohol.
Um, where obviously it's a lot cheaper.
You know, the, the, the illicit supply is a lot cheaper.
Um, it's become quite a, um, a, a killing field for the,
for the organized crime over there actually.
Um, literally, um, again, building on Greg's question,
I think it's, uh, pretty hard to think here.
There wouldn't be a lot of leakage of cheap cigarettes
into the black market at worst.
And even two probably people that wouldn't be eligible
for the cheap cigarettes otherwise.
Um, you, that that is a,
a very real argument against.
Would you agree?
I absolutely agree, yes.
I absolutely concur with that statement
and it's a matter of working around that.
You shouldn't just use as an excuse to slam the door.
I just want the door to be cropped open a little bit
and let's talk about these options.
This is just one option that came to mind.
I mean, there's like, thought about it hard and long enough.
I might come up with some other options,
but that seems the most cost effective
because our, um,
people in New Zealand already have our cards.
We've got our community services card
and we've got our gold card.
So the government wouldn't have to roll out anything.
It's all in place. We just need to tack on
and new updated clause to the current policy
and widen the parameters
to be inclusive, isn't it?
And the other thing I was just gonna say, would this,
the eligibility, would you not use the same eligibility
perhaps for those that are on a benefit or low income?
Are these not the same?
Would these people then not have the same arguments that
absolutely, because we're low income, we should
be able to get cheap cigarettes?
Abso absolutely right.
And that's, that's actually what I'm hoping for.
It will, it'll bring the discussion onto the table.
It will start weeding out the, the illusions that wrap
around the smoking stigma.
And I think that it, yeah, we need to be open
to those conversations
and if it's something that's too hard to control,
if it's impractical, then
how about looking at just bringing our pricing into
alignment instead
of being the most expensive country in the world,
which is nothing to be proud of,
why don't we come into alignment?
So we use a friendly for tourists and our own people.
We are just such a small group now.
We're so small, we are not going to harness life.
Alright, well look, I thank you.
I think you've exhausted the questions
and again, there's a lot of material we've read,
so probably a lot of the answers have to been given.
So thank you for taking, um, your time.
Um, I'm not sure I'd say,
I'm not gonna say good luck giving up smoking.
It doesn't sound like you're
that keen on doing that at the moment.
So, um, but if you do decide to all the best,
I I appreciate it As an ex-smoker.
Good time. Thank you so much. I'm very grateful.
Alright, thank you very much. Thanks for your time. Bye.
Right. Um, we'll move on to item seven.
We've got, uh, Mr. Riley there?
Yep, I'm here. Good day.
Yep. Mr. Riley, uh, thank you for your time.
Greg O'Connor, the chair of the committee.
Um, were you, did you hear introductions before?
I did not, no. Okay. To my right is
Greg Fleming, I'm the, uh, MP for Mongo in Central.
Hi Greg. Hi, I'm Paulo. I'm new mb.
Hi Paul, I'm Ka Carter.
I'm a list MP based in Otto Tahi Christchurch.
Hi. Alright, well thanks Joshua.
Um, you can take your submission as read,
but obviously you would like to
speak to the highlights of it.
Um, we have 10 minutes
and hopefully time for questions at the end.
Yeah, it'll take about six and a half minutes.
Um, yeah, so I'll just briefly review the submission.
You probably already read it, um,
but I'll take a bit of time to respond to the Department
of Internal Affairs, uh, response to our petition.
Um, as you mentioned, I'm Joshua O'Reilly.
I'm here on behalf of Sovereign
and thank you for the opportunity to, uh, speak
to our petition at its heart.
Our petition addresses a fundamental
inconsistency and our democracy.
We currently operate a two-tiered system
of electoral transparency in New Zealand.
Our national elections are held to one standard
of oversight, while our local elections are held
to a lower standard, our petition as for one simple
and powerful change, and that is to repeal section 81 1
of the local electoral act.
This would end the ban on Scrutineers,
observing the early processing of, uh,
local election ballots,
and finally align our local elections
with higher transparency standards
that we rightly enjoy from our national elections.
The current law creates a profound contradiction.
Section 80 allows electoral officers to begin processing
ballots weeks before polling closes.
But section 81 explicitly bans the very people who act
as the public's eyes and ears.
That is the candidate's scrutinies, uh,
from watching this happen.
This is a, a minor, uh, this isn't a minor
procedural issue affecting just a handful of votes.
As our research shows in the 2022 elections, up to 90%
of all ballots in major council areas like Christchurch
and Auckland were processed
before the scrutinies were allowed in the room.
This means that the ma vast majority
of our local democratic process takes place
behind closed doors, uh,
creating a significant democratic deficit.
When the handling of nine out
of every 10 votes is hidden from independent
partisan oversight, public confidence is inevitably eroded.
Our petition offers a simple
and proven, uh, no cost solution that is
to adopt the model already used for national elections
where scrutiny or oversight is a cornerstone of integrity.
The Department of Internal Affairs has submitted in defense
of the current status quo.
However, their arguments are unconvincing
and are based on flawed reasoning
and fundamental misunderstanding of both risk and process.
I will adjust their four main points.
First, the department argues that the presence
of a JP provides adequate independent scrutiny.
This represents a fundamental
misunderstanding of the different roles.
A JP is a passive observer appointed
by the electoral officer to certify
that a procedure was followed.
Their role is clerical.
A a scrutiny in contrast is an active adversarial
representative of a candidate.
Their job is to be skeptical, to question ambiguous ballots
and to defend their candidates interests.
The DIA itself, uh, quotes the electoral commission,
which states that party scrutinies provide independent
assurance in general elections, uh, a JP is appointed
by the very official they are meant to be observing
and simply cannot provide the same level
of robust adversarial scrutiny that builds,
uh, true public trust.
And second, the department raises the fear
that Scrutinies might observe, uh, observe
and leak voting trends, uh,
improperly influencing an election that is still underway.
This concern is unfounded for two critical reasons.
First, this is managed this,
this risk is managed in our national elections, uh,
secure, sorry, I'm getting over.
Flu secure, um,
restricted areas and clear penalties
for breaches work perfectly well.
There is no reason for this successful model, uh,
that this successful model cannot be applied
to local elections.
But more importantly, the DIA's fear is based on a
technical impossibility.
The law makes a clear distinction
between processing and counting votes.
During early processing, a scrutiny was
the administrative task of opening envelopes,
validating individual ballots and scanning them.
They would not see running totals, aggregated data
or party vote shares.
There is no statistically meaningful trend to observe,
let alone to leak this objection,
which is the DIA's primary argument is entirely baseless.
Third, the department suggests
that modern automated voters voting systems make scrutinies
and I quote, outdated and irrelevant.
This argument, uh,
which they source from private election companies
themselves, is completely backward, opaque,
centralized, and automated.
Black box systems demand more independent human
oversight, not less.
The less the public can see of the mechanics,
the more they need trusted human representatives in the room
to verify the integrity of the process.
The DIA relied heavily on feedback from the two private
entities, which process votes and
therefore would benefit from removing the overhead
associated with accommodating scrutineers.
The argument that there has been little interest in
utilizing scrutineers is partly a direct result
of section 81 1.
For example, in the 2022 local elections,
we had several scrutineers who had committed to travel
to Auckland to oversee ballot processing.
Upon discovering that only 20%
of ballot processing was subject to scrutiny,
our scrutiny stood down.
Finally, the DIA suggest
that we delay action on this specific law flaw
and wait for a a wider future review of electoral processes.
This is a classic diver diversionary tactic.
We have identified a clear
and serious problem that undermines public trust.
We have also proposed a simple specific solution
that is already working successfully at the national level
to delay a fix is to allow this democratic deficit to fester
through another election cycle.
The argument to maintain the status quo does not hold up
the DIA relies on false equivalence
between the JP and scrutinous.
A speculative risk that is both manageable
and technically impossible.
And a baffling argument
that technolo technological opacity should be met
with less transparency.
The desire to process votes early does not remove the need
to subject all ballot processing to the same level
of scrutiny applied to general election ballots.
Public confidence is the bedrock of a healthy democracy.
The current law actively damages the confidence by hiding up
to 90 per 90% of the vote handling process.
From the public view, we urge this committee
to see past the bureaucracy's defense of a flawed system.
We ask you to recommend that parliament repeal section 81 1
and restore the principles of transparency, accountability,
and public trust to our local elections.
Thank you.
Alright, thank you members questions?
I just have one bottom line.
Has this come about, uh, as a result of
any specific concern where you think
that there had been at some stage, some behavior
or misbehavior during accounting process?
Or is it a, uh, general concern? We,
We don't, I mean, there, there are some individual cases
where, um, the, the counting of ballots
and specifically special votes that come in later on.
Um, there, there are anomalies,
but there is no way to determine if those anomalies occurred
legitimately or not, simply
because the, there's no transparency to the, to the,
the processing of the ballots.
So it's kind of hard, hard to say if, if we think
that something happened because we don't have access to see
what, what transpires, um, o over the, the vast majority
of votes that are processed.
Uh, I just think so Sovereign New Zealand, they uh,
are they a group that was set up to, uh,
in relation to this issue?
Uh, no. Sovereign was set up, um, about three years ago.
It is a political group.
Uh, we advocate ultimately we've, we've got a set
of policies and principles at Sovereign nz.
Um, you'll see ultimately that we advocate for policies
that, um, ensure what we say is generational prosperity
for all New Zealanders.
And we think that election integrity is just one
of those issues I ran for, um, mayor last,
the last election 2022.
I'm running currently in FNDC.
Um, this time I don't, I don't believe
that anything nefarious happened
with the counting of my ballots.
I I don't, I don't, um, contest that.
But I do think that having the same transparency
that we have in national elections is
that the local level is important and just
because they're local elections doesn't mean that that that,
um, the level of, of scrutiny should be lowered.
Alright, thank you members. Any other questions?
Um, no, just, uh, yeah, thanks.
Uh, there the amount of work that you've put into this, you,
you are aware that obviously given the proximity now to
this upcoming local election, if anything was
to be affected, it would, uh, it wouldn't have, um,
wouldn't change anything for this election.
So you are Yep. But I appreciate when you started the
process, you're probably hoping that it would,
but you reconciled to the fact
that the earliest effect would be in 2028.
Yes, I, I'm aware of that.
There's, there's no way within the next, what, four weeks?
I think ballot processing is probably already underway
because, uh, ballots were mailed out two days ago
and I, I suppose that the first are trickling in.
So yeah, we don't expect
that it would affect this election cycle.
Okay. Yeah, I thank you.
Alright, um, again, probably reflection on, uh,
the material we have that, uh, most
of the questions have already been answered,
so thank you very much.
Um, certainly we now we'll consider the material we have
and we'll report back to Parliament and you'll Awesome.
A copy of that report. So thank you very much
for your time. Thank you. Yeah,
Thanks for yours. Cheers.
And good luck at, did you say you are standing
or not standing this time?
Yes.
Yeah, I, I am standing for.